All right, so moving on,
we wanna continue our discussion of scope.
We're going to start looking
at the scope of variables in loops shortly.
But firstly what we're going to do is look at method scope.
So I'm gonna come down, and add a method here
to our Person class, getDecade.
So here we're creating a local variable, decadeString,
that only has scope in this method.
Nothing outside this method can reference this variable.
This is method scope.
Now let's go and add a line to this
below the definition of decadeString,
I'm gonna paste in some code
int age, you can see there equals
Integer.parseInt, this.age in parentheses divided by 10.
And you can see that, by me doing this
we've introduced a compiler error.
And if we hover over the age variable,
variable age is already defined in this scope.
So the local variable name age, which is defined,
and the method parameter name age clash.
Note that the instance variable name age
is not causing any issue, because it can be qualified
using the this keyword, all right.
So I'm gonna remove that line.
All right, let's now continue on
and I'm going to actually introduce a loop
and I'm going to replace the existing getDecade method
with a new definition that includes a loop.
Paste this over the top there.
All right, so we've created
a local variable called decadeNumber.
We've created a local variable j
defined outside the loop
and obviously we've created the decadeString as well,
which will be returning 103.
But we declare and initialise a local variable i
in the loop statement increment both i and j
at the end of each iteration.
Now that's valid because both i and j
are in scope in the loop.
Now currently the for loop has no code in its code block,
we'll add it in a bit later.
But with that said at the moment,
what happens if we wanna set j to a different value
during the loop initialization.
So what we should be able to do
is put a comma after the int i = 0, j = 1.
You can see there variable j
is already defined in the scope.
And because we put j = 1 in the same statement
as the initialization block of the for loop,
this has caused our compile error.
The compiler thinks you want to create another variable j
and this isn't allowed.
You can see we have an error there.
Variable j is already defined in the scope.
We can get around that by modifying the statement slightly
to correct the situation.
So I can change that i = j = 0.
We have for, now in parentheses, int i = j = 0.
So here we've declared a new variable called i
and have initialised to an existing variable j
which is set to zero when loop gets initialised.
And because assignments are right to left
j is initialised to zero at first
and then i is initialised to j.
All right, so let's add the following code block
I'm about to paste into our for loop.
Like so.
With a local variable loop block variable called decade,
the scope for that is within the loop.
So now that I've done that,
what happens if we wanna create
a new variable i in the if statement on line 103.
So can I come down here and type int i = 1.
As you can see, we can't,
variable i is already defined in the scope.
Again, we've introduced a compile error.
Just because you're in your own block,
the if block, you still have access
to variables outside that scope
and the compiler would be unable to distinguish
between the i in this if block
and the i in the surrounding block.
Hence we've got the error.
So I'll remove that line.
All right, so continuing on now,
let's add another loop right after our existing loop.
And I'll go ahead and do that.
Paste in the code there.
Now, from this code, you can see that the local variable j
is still in scope and using it here
in this for loop is perfectly valid.
But the reference to i is invalid
and that's because i went out of scope
when the previous loop ended.
And looking back up at the code,
you can see that we defined a i on line 100.
And, obviously, that loop is now completed
and i has gone out of scope.
So we just remove now this j for loop,
the second for loop.
So now that we've done that,
let's actually add to the toString method
and what I'll do is take a copy of some code
and go back up to our toString method
so that we can evoke a call to this method as well,
the method we've been working on.
And I'm just going to replace that.
So we can see now we're making a call
to the getAgeGroupClassification method,
but also to a getDecade method
that we've defined in this video.
So if you run this code you can see
that Joe is 55 years old, baby boomer,
decade five, year five.
And Deb, decade eight and year five.
And decade two, year one.
So in short, summarising, the best way to quickly see
if your local variable definition
is going to raise a compile error
is to ask yourself if you can qualify it by class type,
or the words this, or super, et cetera.
If you cannot, and it's already been defined
in an outer scope, then it will cause an error.
And we've seen many errors of that nature in this video.
And this is especially hard to spot
in for loop initialization statements,
which is why I added some just to show you there.
Shadowing is when a local variable is legally declared,
but another declaration that can be qualified
is not used or accessed,
because the local variable takes precedence.
In the next video we'll see what we can do
with scope variables if we use nested
or inner classes in the out of ordinary section.
See you in the next video.